Contents lists available at ScienceDirect eechomsetalianery

“|

. Ae 25
By Sn sh mY ’ er
i ae J
a) a

Hydrometallurgy

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/hydromet
A literature review of titanium metallurgical processes
Wensheng Zhang, Zhaowu Zhu, Chu Yong Cheng *
ARTICLE
Article history: Various titanium metallurgical processes have been reviewed and compared for titanium dioxide and titanium
Received 12 July 2010 . metal, mainly focusing on the future development of hydrometallurgical processes. It is recognised that ilmenite
Received in revised form 8 April 2011 is becoming increasingly important due to the rapid depletion of natural rutile. Many processes are commercially
Accepted 10 April 2011 . ; ; . ; ae
. ; used or proposed to upgrade ilmenite to synthetic rutile. Most of these processes involve a combination of
Available online 16 April 2011
pyrometallurgy and hydrometallurgy and are generally expensive.
The commercialised thermo-chemical chloride processes such as Kroll and Hunter processes are batch operations

Keywords:
Y and need higher grade natural rutile or upgraded synthetic rutile and slag as the feed and the involvement of cost

Titanium
Titanium dioxide sensitive chlorination and thermo steps. Many improvements for the thermo-chemical processes have been
Titanium pigment made, but they hold little potential for significant cost reductions beyond current technology. The development of
the electro-chemical processes for direct reduction of TiQz and electro-slag as feed material and in-situ electrolysis
has achieved some success. However, some challenging issues such as redox cycling, feeding, kinetics, control
heat balance have to be resolved before scaling-up to commercial applications.
Direct hydrometallurgical leach processes are advantageous in processing abundant ilmenite ores, low energy
Strategies, separation of metals by solvent extraction, reduced wastes and recycling acids, and very promising for
commercial applications in future. Direct chloride leaching processes have been investigated intensively,
featuring purification by solvent extraction and reclaiming HCI by hydrolysis or pyrohydrolysis. Caustic leach
with high selectivity and titanium dioxide nano-technology has also been developed. Further development of
direct leaching ilmenite coupled with solvent extraction for titanium pigment and metal production, is
recommended.
1.1. Titanium occurrence and resources
also in hard rock deposits, has quite extensive reserves: about
iron and 100 times greater than copper, yet for structural applications
titanium

Ss annual use is 200 times less than copper and 2000 times
less than iron. Its commercial production commenced in 1948 driven
2009a, 2010). The main titanium-containing minerals are rutile,
1.2. Titanium products, usages and process overview
* Corresponding author. Tel.: +61 8 9334 8916; fax: +61 8 9334 8001.
E-mail address: chu.cheng@csiro.au (C.Y. Cheng).
0304-386X/$ - see front matter. Crown Copyright © 2011 Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
In the 1950s, titanium deposits containing 30% rutile were common.
(Minkler and Baroch 1981). IImenite, not only found in beach sands, but
titanium resource will continue to dominate the titanium industry in the
future.
IImenite (FeO-Ti0O> or TiFeO;) contains 40-65% TiO>, depending on
its geological history. Leucoxene (Fe,03-nTiO>) is a natural alteration
product of ilmenite, typically containing more than 65% TiO>. Table 1
sitions (Barksdale 1966;Rhee and Sohn 1990;Whitehead 1983). Rutile
contains about 95% TiO, and is the most titanium-rich mineral. Its
The most widely used titanium product is titanium dioxide (TiOQ2),
Table 1
Titanium minerals and their chemical compositions.
Mineral Composition TiO» content (%)
Rutile TiO, (tetragonal, twinned) ~95%
Anatase TiO, (tetragonal, near octahedral) ~95%
Brookite TiO, (orthorhombic) ~95%
Iimenite
Leucoxene
Arizonite
Perovskite
Geikielite

FeO -T105

Fe,03° nTiOz

Fe,03° nTiO> -mH,0
CaTiO3

MeTiO;

40-65%

>65%
Titanite or sphene CaTiSiO;
Titaniferous magnetite (Fe-Ti)203
high grade rutile. All these make the upgrading of ilmenite to synthetic
as flux in glass manufacture. Only about 6% is used to produce metallic
titanium (Rosebaum 1982). The major sources of TiO, are from:
Natural rutile. After a series of concentration of beach sands through
gravity concentration, electrostatic separation to remove non-
conducting zircon materials and magnetic separation to separate
magnetic ilmenite, the rutile concentrate containing about 95% TiO2
is used as TiO raw material directly (Kahn, 1984).

Synthetic rutile. There are a few processes to remove the iron from
ilmenite to produce synthetic rutile which typically contains about
92% TiO>.

High titanium slag. IlImenite is smelted in an electric arc furnace to
produce pig iron and high titanium slag which typically contains
about 85-90% TiQ>.
The biggest consumer of TiO>z is the pigment industry. Unusual
optical properties appear when the average particle size of TiO> is
reduced to <100 nm, including high transparency to visible light and
high UV absorption (Ellsworth et al. 2000). Nano-particles of TiO> also
cause some components of visible light to be reflected and refracted
differentially, leading to the phenomenon of iridescence. Nano-particles
of TiO; have found applications in cosmetics, porcelains and ceramics
industries as coating material and additives. Nano-particles of titanium
oxide have received great attention recently for their potential
applications in catalysis and as photo-electrochemical material. The
Thermo/Electro-Chemical Processes Hydrometallurgical Processes
(40-65% TiO3)
Ilmenite

(90-95% TiO>)

(>90% TiO>) (95% TiO2)
Natural rutile Synthetic rutile Fe scrap

HCl Leaching | | H,SO, leaching

TiCly
FeSO,-H,O

Ti slag

Me or Na

Sponge Ti Cathode T1
“
Melting
TiO, TiO,

Ti Metal (>99.5 pigment) (>98 TiO, Anatase)
high photo-catalytic activity of titanium oxide by irradiation of visible
light has been rapidly developed in recent years (Sakatani et al. 2002;
Sakatani and Koike, 2003, 2004).
The processes for production of pigment grade TiO, and titanium
metal are schematically presented in Fig. 1. There are two processes to
manufacture titanium pigment: the sulphate process and the chloride
process. The two processes differ in both their chemistry and raw
material requirements (Hamor 1986). Because the chloride process has
some advantages over the traditional sulphate process in cost and waste
management, it has dominated the pigment industry in recent times.
However, unlike the sulphate process

in which low-grade titanium raw
material is acceptable, the chloride process needs a high grade of rutile
rutile more and more important. However, the upgrading processes are
generally expensive due to the involvement of multi steps of energy
sensitive thermo reductive conversions and leaching to remove iron
impurities.

Titanium metal is commercially produced by thermo chemical
reduction processes using TiCl, as feed material. The low efficiency
and high energy consumption in the batch operations make the
thermo chemical processes rather expensive. Electro chemical
reduction and direct reduction process for TiO2 in molten CaCl2 to
produce pure titanium metal and its alloy have been developed in
recent years as a potential alternative to the conventional commercial
processes (Chen et al., 2000, 2001; Fray, 2001; Ono and Suzuki 2002;
Suzuki 2007; Suzuki et al. 2003). However, difficulties in eliminating
redox cycling and in handling very reactive dendritic products.

In the next decade, global demand growth for TiO> is expected to
continue to increase at an average rate of about 3% annually (Gambogi,
2009a, 2009b, 2010). Growth higher than the average is expected to
occur in the Asia region. China in particular is expected to lead world
growth in production and consumption. However, the proliferation of
small TiO, pigment plants using the sulphate-route in China was
expected to recede as environmental concerns rise. TiOz production
capacity in China is expected to double, reaching 1 Mt/yr by the end of
the decade. In the next several years, prices for TiO, pigment are
expected to rise because of increasing costs for chlorine, coke, caustic
soda, and energy. Growth in aerospace, defence, and industrial uses will
W. Zhang et al. / Hydrometallurgy 108 (2011) 177-188
world-wide capacities would be expected to reach 350,000 t/yr
(Gambogi, 2009a, 2009b, 2010).
In recent years, direct hydrochloric leaching and solvent extraction
(SX) hydrometallurgical processes have been developed to produce
pigment grade TiOz (>99.5%) and titanium metal through conven-
tional fused electrolysis (Duyvesteyn et al., 2001a, 2002; Lakshmanan
et al., 2001, 2002, 2004a, 2004b, 2005a, 2005b; Lakshmanan and
Sridhar 2002; Puvvada et al. 2003; Verhulst et al., 2002, 2003).
Improved sulphate processes and caustic leach processes have also
been developed. Hydrometallurgical processes will become more and
more important due to its low energy requirement compared to the
conventional thermo and electro chemical processes.
This review briefly summarises the conventional thermo and electro
chemical processes and highlights the ilmenite processing and the
production of titanium dioxide and metal through hydrometallurgical
routes. Various processes for titanium production are compared in
terms of their technical feasibility, economics and product quality,
aiming at identifying promising processes and directions in future
development for fully hydrometallurgical processes.
into another fluidised bed where ferric ion is reduced by a reducing
agent (for example, H> gas). The product from the second fluidised bed
2. Upgrading ilmenite to synthetic rutile
There are a number of commercialised or proposed processes to
produce synthetic rutile or high grade titanium slag from ilmenite as
feed for the chloride process. These processes involve a combination
of thermal oxidation and reduction by roasting, leaching and physical
separation steps. Iron is converted to soluble ferrous or elemental
forms by reduction at high temperatures followed by acid leaching to
obtain synthetic rutile (TiO2) products. The process features are
summarised in Table 2 and discussed subsequently.
An industrial process for upgrading ilmenite to synthetic rutile is
typically represented by the Becher process (Bracanin et al. 1980;
Cassidy et al., 1986; Farrow et al. 1987; Hoecker, 1994; Reaveley
1980). The ilmenite contains 40-65% titanium as TiO:, with the rest
being iron oxide. The Becher process removes the iron oxide, leaving a
residue of synthetic rutile, which contains more than 90% TiO>. A
schematic flowsheet comprising four major steps: oxidation, reduc-
tion, aeration and acid leach is shown in Fig. 2.

Oxidation involves heating the ilmenite in a rotary kiln with air to
convert the iron in ilmenite to iron oxides:
AFeTiO3,,) + Oz.) > 2Fe,03-TiO,,,) + 2TIO,,,.
This allows for the use of a wide range of ilmenite materials with
various Fe(II

Nee

and Fe(III

ed

forms for subsequent step.
Process Pyro-treatment Leaching Advantage Disadvantages
The Becher sulphate

Iron oxidised to Fe,O2 and reduced (a) NH,C1/O>

Multi step iron conversions and leaching
Improved efficiency by using fluidised beds Similar to the Becher processes
but fluidised beds for the

Easier HC! recycle than sulphate system
The Laporte process

Lower temperatures for iron

18% HC! with a bed

Free of formation of fine TiQ> particles
conversion to FeO with controlled contactor Ease for leaching FeO lower temperature used
carbon thermo-reduction
ilmenite with Cl>5
The Kataoka process Conversion to ferrous form H2SO4 Less corrosive using H2SO,4 than HC! Produce large iron sulphate wastes
Reduction is performed in a rotary kiln with pseudobrookite
Fe,03 ‘TI05/.) + 3CO,,) oo 2Fe,. — 2T105/.) ~ 3CO3,4)
The metallic iron is oxidised and precipitated from the solution as a
form of slime in the aeration “rusting” step in large tanks with 1%
ammonium chloride solution at 80°C. The finer iron oxide is then
separated from the larger particles of synthetic rutile.
4Fe..) + 302/¢) > 2Fe,03
Once the majority of the iron oxide is removed, the residual iron
oxide is leached using 0.5M sulfuric acid and separated from the
synthetic rutile.
Another commercial process, the Benelite process, employs carbon
thermo-reduction for conversion of other iron forms to ferrous state and
is then separated by leaching with 18-20% HCl. Fluidised beds are used
in the Murso process (Sinha, 1972, 1975) for the thermo-conversions,
where the pre-oxidation of ilmenite is carried out in a fluidised bed ina
temperature range of 900-950 °C, and the hot oxidised ore is transferred
is then leached with about 20% HCl at 108-110 °C. The remaining HCl
rutile from the leach solution
In the Laporte process, the ore is pre-oxidised in a fluidised bed at
about 950 °C (Robinson et al. 1977) followed by reductive roasting in
a rotary kiln using coal as reductant at ca 900 °C. The incomplete
reduction of iron to the ferrous state without metallisation is achieved
by the appropriate choice of equipment, temperature and reductant.
There is a sufficient CO, partial pressure developed to prevent the
formation of metallic iron due to the reaction:
CO 0) + Fe.) — FeO...) + CO,.)
The roasted ore is so reactive that a single stage leach with 18% HCl at
atmospheric pressure for 3.5 h is all that is needed, yielding a product of
the same overall particle size range as the starting ore. A bed contactor is
used for leaching to prevent the formation of very fine particles from the
soft feedstock. It is claimed that the discharged ore is free of fine TiO>
particles.

Reduction roasting, in which iron in ilmenite is reduced to ferrous
Kataoka process in Japan (Kataoka and Yamada 1973). In this process,
hydrated titanium dioxide is added to the leaching solution as seeds to
removal of iron. This also allows the separation of iron from the ore at
magnetic iron form
Ilmenite (FeTiO3) Oy +NH,Cl

Air Coal+S Reduced Oxidative Separation
Oxidation Reduction | Ilmenite | precipitation P Fe, 0s

(Fe,03) (Fe) Ti0O>2/some Fe
oxides

Ti05
Washing & drying —_| S/L separation H,SO,
Leach

Synthetic rutile Fe impurities
co
Mn
—
lower temperature and at a sulphuric acid concentration that makes the
the ilmenite can be recovered.
While most processes produce synthetic rutile with 93% TiOs;, in the
—

Walpole and Winter 2002). Ilmenite ore is roasted at temperatures
gangue minerals may be easily removed by magnetic separation.
leaching is enhanced. Iron and other impurities are removed by leaching
and a synthetic rutile containing >97% TiO> is obtained.
A different thermo-conversion was proposed in the Dunn process
proposed selective chlorination process is that iron in ilmenite is more
readily chlorinated than titanium. Excess ilmenite in the fluidised bed
prevents the chlorination of titanium because any titanium that
chlorinates will react with iron oxide to form titanium dioxide. The
iron chloride gas leaving the fluidised bed reacts with oxygen to form
Fe,03 and Cl,5 gas for recycle as described in the following equation
4FeCls/.)

+ 300)

= 2Fe703/)
The reactivity of ilmenite ore during leaching with hydrochloric acid
was greatly enhanced by reduction in solution using metallic iron
powder for 1 kg ilmenite ore) was proved to largely enhanced the
with 2.5 h under similar other leach conditions with no iron powder
the removal of iron from the mineral lattice and avoid titanium
dissolution. Without addition of a reductant, iron leaching efficiency did
not exceed about 55% when using concentrated HCl (12 M) with an S/L
ratio of 1:5 at 90 °C for 8 h although almost complete insolubilisation of
titanium was realized. Addition of metallic iron raised the recovery to
89% TiO>. It is clearly evident that addition of a reductant is necessary to
mineralogical composition resulting from the existence of the three
fundamental solid solution series in the FeEOQ—Fe,03-TiO> ternary system
pseudobrookite series.
3. Thermo and electro chemical processes
system is used to produce a purer TiO and titanium metal employing
more complicated technology (Fig. 1). First, synthetic rutile or high
erade titanium slag is obtained from upgrading the ilmenite ores and is
then purified by chlorination at an elevated temperature

—,

900-950 °C)
to obtain pure titanium tetrachloride (TiCl,):
TIO3,,) + 2Clo9) + 2C(s) = TiCly,,) + 2CO/.)
TiO,

+ 2Cly.o)

) + C(s) =

+ CO9/)
The TiCl, is separated from impurities by condensation and
distillation. However the separation of TiCl, from VOCI: is difficult due
to their close boiling points and needs special treatment by adding
mineral oil, H»S gas, or copper metal. Three commercial processes are
Baroch 1981), namely fluidised bed process (most widely used), shaft
furnace process and chlorination in a molten salt bath (former U.S.S.R.
gaseous chlorine, which Is capital intensive, resulting in the formation of
dioxins, furans, and other deleterious persistent organic pollutants
(Lakshmanan et al.

2004a). After the oxidation of the titanium
tetrachloride at high temperature to produce titanium dioxide, a
reduction stage is used to convert the purified titanium dioxide to
number of techniques to obtain titanium metal. The wastes produced by
The Hunter process is the pioneering process developed in 1887 to
reduce TiCl, to titanium metal in a molten sodium bath. It was later
1940 to reduce TiCl4 in molten magnesium at 900 °C (Table 3). The
low efficiency, high energy consumption and high cost, and
recycling (Jackson and Dring 2006). Since then, numerous investiga-
tions have been reported and several alternative processes have been
developed, including better reactor design, omitting cooling step
between the TiCl, reduction with vacuum distillation, the develop-
W. Zhang et al. / Hydrometallurgy 108 (2011) 177-188
Processes for reduction of tetrachloride to titanium metal.
Process Features Advantage
Labor-intensive ba

tch process:
processes (T

hermo)

metallic impurities; lower co

stly using Me heterogeneous exothermic reactions;
than Na reduction
van Vuuren et al. 7005
Cardarelli

2003;
and CO evolution
feed in a single cell
(direct electro ) cathode; inert anode for O> evolution; efficiency; potential continuous pellet feed: long time for removing Fray, 2001
producing final titanium products (van Vuuren 2009). Researchers at
produce titanium powder, and Elliott (1998) reported to circulate the
molten salt (the TiLAC process). To increase the production efficiency
and energy efficiency, TiCl, was tested as the feed material (Takeda and
Okabe, 2006). Alternative processes were also reported, including the
production of titanium alloys, production of titanium ingots, carboni-
trothermic reduction method, fluorotitanate process, and calcium
processes, such as the Kroll and Hunter processes, hold little potential
to significantly reduce the cost of titanium. The Timet and D-H titanium
(Table 3). Major advantages of electrochemical extraction are reduced
energy consumption, automation, and continuous production. However,
the electrolysis process suffers from difficulties in eliminating redox
cycling and in handling very reactive dendritic products, which has
hindered its success in commercialisation (Chen et al. 2000).
Recently, a direct electro-chemical reduction technique shows
tremendous promise to reduce the cost of titanium production. The
direct reduction process accomplishes the production in one single step
(Suzuki et al. 2003 ). The production cost would be largely reduced if TiO;
can be used as a feed material without use of chlorination for the TiCl,
including Electro-slag electrolysis processes (ESE), the OS Process and the
Fray—Farthing—Chen (FFC) process, with their own features (Table 3). In
comparison, the FFC process features better efficiency, but the require-
Improved thermo processes.
Process Features
Continuous, low temperature Tl metal product
Ti alloy and ingots processes

Production of Ti alloys or ingots
Carbonitrothermic reduction Alternative reductants or reagents
Fluorotitanate process
Calcium reduction
Disadvantage Reference
the waste CaCl2 after the electrolysis
material could be an alternative in the scale-up.
Hydrometallurgical processes
titanium dioxide from ores involves roasting and leaching to obtain an
intermediate product of synthetic rutile with 90-95% TiO>,. Hence
further purification such as chlorination is required to produce a
pigment-grade titanium dioxide, which makes the process compli-
cated and adds costs to the process. To solve this problem, direct
leaching—purification processes have been developed to obtain
pigment grade titanium dioxide without the production of interme-
diate synthetic rutile. Titanium dioxide nano-technology has also
been developed. The process features are compared in Table 5.
convert ilmenite to titanium pigment. In the sulphate process

+

ilmenite
(40-60% TiO2) and/or titanium slag (72-87% TiOz) is digested with
sulphuric acid to form water soluble sulphates (titanyl sulphate TiOSO,
and iron sulphates). Metallic iron scrap is used to reduce the ferric iron to
ferrous iron which otherwise will co-precipitate with TiOz and
contaminate the product. The solution is then cooled down to crystallise
the iron as ferrous sulphate heptahydrate (FeSO,:7H>0O). To this point,
the process is in the “black stage”. The solution is then subjected to
hydrolysis and the resultant solids are subjected to calcination to produce
anhydrous TiO>. This is so-called the “white stage”. It uses simple
technology and lower grade and cheaper raw materials to produce a form
preferred over the pigment from the chloride process for use in papers,
lower quality products for most applications and large quantities of waste
Reference
Comparison of sulphate processes with chloride processes.
Traditional sulphate leaching

Natural ilmenite
(>44 Ti0>) Ti slag

iron sulphate waste and dilute
process Fe scrap reductant extraction; >97% with
crystallisation
Thermo chloride processes

>90% Ti0> natural or

Pigment grade products
Chloride leaching process
expensive acid treatment th

an the chloride process. A typical conven-
Leaching
Ferric reduction
Fe, (SO4)3 + Fe — 3FeSO,
Ferrous sulphate crystallisation
FeSO, + 7H,0 — FeSO, ‘ 7H,0

(10)
Titanyl sulphate precipitation
TiOSO, + H,O — TiOSO,-2H,0

(11)
Hydrolysis
TiOSO, + 2H,0O — TiO(OQH), + H»SO,
Calcination
TiO(OH), > TiO, +H,

(13)
In a patent process by Watanable and Sei (1988), the recovery of
titanium from sulphuric acid solutions containing mainly titanium and
iron comprises (a) adding NaCl or the like to the solution and extracting
iron as chloride complex with one or more organic extractants from the
group of oxygen-containing organic solvents and alkylamines,
(b) extracting titanium from the raffinate from (a) into the organic
phase as chloride complex with one or more organic extractants from
the group of alkylphosphoric acids and alkylarylphosphoric acids,
(c) stripping the resultant organic solution with an aqueous solution
containing NHZ or K* together with HF, and then (d) adding NH3 gas,
NH,(OH) or KOH to the aqueous solution to form a precipitate such as
(NH,)2TiF, or titanium hydroxide. Titanium halides and alkoxides can
be produced from the precipitate.

Researchers at BHP Billiton Innovation Pty invented an improved
sulphate process for production of titania (Roche et al. 2004). The
process, as shown in Fig. 3, features:
(i) The use of at least a part of raffinate from solvent extraction
consumption; simple technology

H»SO, production
Reduced waste: producing clean Increased process complexity
to produce purer products acid solution
Suitable for larger scale corrosive high energy consumption:
complicated technology
Waste more environmentally
Higher capita

| costs for equipment
lower cost for waste and more and construction: higher requirement
environmental acceptable: higher for operation and maintenance skill
Higher leaching selectivity for T1 Need for transformation of titanate to
over Fe; mild leach conditions at hydrous T10> in acidic solution;
solution and energy consumption
effluents and/or their neutralization products such as 'brown
sypsum'; and allows recuperation of heat and also eliminates
energy intensive acid recovery and evaporative concentration
steps.
simplify downstream processing of the iron sulphate.
(iv) Selective solvent extraction (SX) step with organic systems such
as trioctylphosphine oxide (TOPO) and butyl dibutylphospho-
nate to separate titanium from impurities of iron, chromium,
manganese and niobium.
(v) Due to the solvent extraction step, the titania produced has a
very high purity (>99%).
(vi) The use of a reductant such as metallic iron, Ti(IIl) salts, SO>,
thiosulphate, etc. to makes it possible to use less concentrated
Sulphuric acid than is required for the conventional sulphate
process.
In another patented process developed BHP Billiton researchers
Roche, et al. 2005), crystallisation of titanyl sulfate step is used as an
alternative to solvent extraction to produce TiOSO, crystals which is
then dissolved and hydrolysed to form a solid phase containing
hydrated titanium oxides followed by calcining the solid phase and
forming titania. In the hydrolysis step, the crystal growth in the
reactor could be controlled under temperature, residence time and
solution concentration to produce coarse hydrated titanium oxides
with a particle size of at least 0.005-0.01 mm or fine hydrated
titanium oxides with a particle size of less than 0.0005 mm, suitable
for a wide range of further processing. Compared to the use of solvent
extraction technique in the process, the crystallisation is simpler, but
the final synthetic product is less pure with about 97% TiO>. Both
flowsheets have been tested to a continuous pilot stage.

Further research and development by the BHP Billiton researchers
resulted in an alternative involvement of a reduction roasting step to
reduce ferric iron to ferrous iron in the ilmenite by a reducing gas at a
controlled temperature range to avoid formation of rutile that is
unleachable under the conditions of leaching step (Stuart et al. 2005). It
may also comprise a mixture of hydrogen, carbon monoxide, and/or
methane, and another suitable gas such as inert gas and/or carbon
dioxide. This reductive pre-treatment step make the leaching efficiency
W. Zhang et al. / Hydrometallurgy 108 (2011) 177-188
Leachate
Ilmenite
Scrap Fe

98% H5SO,4
Scrap Fe
Residue
Leach Stage 2 Leach Stage |

Raffinate

Residue Leachate

_ So _
. TiOSO4 a Dilute acid to
Water Hydrolysis > gypsum pp

TiO(OH)>

Calcination

ie
_—
Ina
which may result in sensitive energy consumption.
seed resulting in premature precipitation of the dissolved titanyl
sulphate during the leach step and is one of the major factors in
preventing the achievement of high extraction rates (Stuart et al. 2010).
Ilmetite
Scrap Fe

98% H,SO,

Leach Stage

Pre-treatment
SO,/N>

Leachate
Filtrate
35-40%
H,SO, Titanyl sulphate Copperas FeSO4

Crystallisation Crystallisation Crystals

TiOSO,-2H,O TiO(OH),

Titanium Bl 3 ;
. ; eaching 3+,
Dissolution & Ti” solution

Al,(SO4);

Calcinatio ,
Reduction H,PO,

OR 5+1) 5%

(0.27+0.03um 102
(Fig. 4). It was also found by the inventors that the co-precipitated ferric
iron with titanyl sulphate tended to be carried forward to downstream
reduction step is used with a suitable reductant such as Ti°~ species,
hydrolysis of TiO(OH)z to reduce chromophores into their soluble
forms. In calcination step, additives of a mixture of K5SO,, ZnO and
range of 0.27 + 0.03 um. The final rutile product obtained is 98.5 + 0.5%
leach solution is subjected to solvent extraction of iron with TBP and
and subjected to pyrohydrolysis to recover iron as iron oxides. The
Berkovich (1975) to dissolve at least 80% of the titanium and iron in the
ilmenite ore. Ferric ions were reduced to ferrous ions by SO> and the
resultant FeCl, was crystallised and separated. The titanium chloride in
the solution was hydrolysed, precipitated, further purified and calcined
to reduce some Ti** to Ti°*. Due to the greater affinity of Ti°* for
oxidation, as compared to Fe**, the presence of a small quantity of Ti?*
in the solution decreases the tendency for Fe~* ions to later oxidise to
Fe’* and possibly contaminate the later-formed TiO; (Berkovich, 1975).
subsequent separation of iron by conventional hydrolysis or solvent
extraction. Pyrohydrolysis is a distinct feature of the chloride leaching
process to recover TiOz and MgO reagents, and simultaneously recover
electrowon using the fused salt electrolysis technique. The advantage of
FeTiO, + 4HCl — TiOCI, + FeCl, + 2H,O
TiOCl, + H,O > TiO, + 2HCI
titanium-bearing ore or concentrates was reported by Lakshmanan
MgCl, + H,O > MgO + 2HCI

(16)
pressure with a lixiviant containing a chloride and hydrochloric acid ina
In another patent by Thomas (1985), a dilute acid leach was used
ahead of strong acid leach (25% HC1) to eliminate some easily dissolvable
impurities. After ferrous chloride crystallisation and chlorination, the
TiCl, was hydrolysed to obtain pigment grade TiO>. It was found that
alcohols such as methanol, ethanol and ethylene glycol all substantially
increased the leaching rate of ilmenite in mixed HCl-alcohol solutions
(Girgin and Turker 1986).
Ilmenite
HCl
Pyrohydrolysis

Water S/L separation

TiO, PPTN

Raffinate

Calcination Precipitation | a Pyrohydrolysis
TiO> product
A process for the production of pigment-grade TiO, using chloride
media was developed (Lakshmanan et al., 2001, 2002, 2004a, 2004b,
2005a, 2005b; Lakshmanan and Sridhar 2002; Puvvada et al. 2003). The
process involves the leaching of the ore or concentrate with a hydrogen
raffinate has a concentration of less than 50 mg/L Fe, and is treated to
precipitate TiO, by addition of water. The solution rich in titanium
chlorides is then hydrolysed, with calcium or magnesium chlorides, to
precipitate titanium oxyhydrate which is then converted to TiO;
presence of air and/or oxygen.
Alternatively, the titanium in the leach solution is extracted by an
organic phase, which is subjected to fractional distillation (Lakshmanan
et al., 2004a, 2004b). The organic phase is so selected that they have
different boiling points to that of the titanium halide in the leachate by an
amount that permits separation by fractional distillation, typically a higher
or lower boiling point than that of the titanium tetrachloride by 30 °C. The
selected organic phase is phosphine oxides or esters and tertiary or
titanium halide. Stripping the titanium halide from the organic phase is
achieved by heating to volatilise the titanium tetrachloride, which is then
the tetrachloride solids, titanium metal can be
this process is to ensure environmental acceptance at low costs and to
A method providing cost-effective extraction of titanium from
et al. (2005a and 2005b). The first step is leaching the ore at atmospheric
temperature range of less than 85°C. The concentration of the
hydrochloric acid is at least 20% to allow titanium to be leached and
remain in solution. The preferred chloride is magnesium chloride to
enhance the extraction of titanium. The lixiviant may contain an
oxidant, e.g. chlorate salts or chlorine. The redox potential (Eh) of the
solution is controlled at least 350 mV in combination with the control of
chloride concentration for leaching metal values.
W. Zhang et al. / Hydrometallurgy 108 (2011) 177-188
Ilmenite
Pyrohydrolysis

Fe 203 product Thermo stripping

S/L separation Solid waste

Solution

Solvent extraction

Stripped Org

iL

TiCl,

Fused electrolysis
Duyvesteyn et al. (2001a and 2002

Nee

and Verhulst et al. (2002 and
to generate a leachate containing titanium and iron chloride and residue,
(ii) cooling the solution to form crystals of FeCl, which are separated
from the leachate, (iii) extracting titanium together with ferric ions by a
first solvent extraction (SX) circuit with phosphine oxide to produce
raffinate containing ferrous ions and other impurities, (iv) extracting
ferric ions in the second SX circuit with an amine extractant from the
loaded strip liquor of the first SX circuit, (v) hydrolysing the raffinate to
produce pigment grade TiO;, (vi) pyrohydrolysing/distilling the strip
liquor containing ferric ions to produce ferric oxides and reclaiming HCl
for leaching. Alternatively, the ferric ions in the leachate could be reduced
to ferrous ions electrolytically or by a metal such as iron scrap before the
crystallisation of FeCl,. The advantages of the process include: (1) using
inexpensive ilmenite as the feed material, (2) using gaseous HCl to
solution, (3) using solvent extractions to separate titanium from iron and
Concentrate Fe scrap

Crystallisation

Pyrohydrolysis

/distillation -
Hydrolysis

Fe oxide
Weak acid

Residue

TiO, product
Ti metal
other impurities, (4) Recovering iron as an oxide of potential commercial
value (5) regenerating and recycling substantial gaseous HCI for leaching.
4.3. Caustic leaching processes
A novel process was patented for preparing titanium dioxide from
titanium slag in sodium or potassium hydroxide solution by the
researchers at Chinese Academy of Science (CAS) (Liu et al. 2006; Qi
et al. 2005; Tong et al. 2007; Xue et al. 2009). The ilmenite is
decomposed in concentrated KOH or NaOH solution under atmospheric
pressure and an intermediate with high in titanium and low in iron is
obtained by separation, which can be converted into pigment grade
titanium dioxide after further treatment (Fig. 8). The reaction of ilmenite
with concentrated KOH solutions led to the formation of potassium
titanate (K,4Ti3;0g) and iron oxide could be described by:
3FeTiO, + 4KOH — K,Ti,0g + 3FeO + 2H,O
Ti slag

NaOH recycle
Decomposition in molten salt
Concentrated
Water treatment /separation Impurity removal

NaOH liquor
Solids/TiO,

Refluxing in diluted acid By-product

Hydrous Ti dioxide
The phase transformation of potassium titanate was carried out by
hydrolysing the potassium titanate in acid solution (pH 2.0

ed
400 °C to form well-crystallised anatase TiO2. Approximately 95-98%
Ti in the titanium slag could be extracted under optimal conditions. In
addition, the TiOz purity in the product was up to 99.3%.
A similar process using caustic leaching for the production of
finely ground titanium slag (—61+51 um) was reacted with a 10M
hydrothermal product was identified by XRD as NayTi3QOg¢. Titanium
dioxide with a rutile structure was obtained by acidification and
<1.20. The purity of TiO, was >99% when HCl was used.
requires relatively mild reaction conditions and high decomposition
rate of titanium slag can be fulfilled under relatively low temperature
hydrolysis in a spray dryer (Fig. 9). Nano-sized particles of TiO2 could be
various inorganic salts and organic acids and organic Salts, e.g. oxalic
Electrochemical techniques have been investigated for the reduction
and dissolution of two different ilmenite samples in 450 ¢/L sulphuric
acid solutions at elevated temperatures (Zhang and Nicol 2009). The
Chemical

Control
Reagent

Chloride solution
——
Spray hydrolysis

Raffinate

Nano-Ti0,,

Milling Finishing
more negative potentials the dissolution of ilmenite increases simulta-
neously with the reduction of ilmenite to trivalent titanium. Hematite
dissolved faster under reductive conditions than ilmenite. Studies of the
the non-reductive dissolution reaction is insignificant under these
challenges in energy consumption, dissolution kinetics and selectivity
for advancement.
titanium dioxide from aqueous titanium chloride solutions (Duyvesteyn
et al., 2001b, 2001c, 2003). It features hydrolysing the solution via
amorphous titanium oxide followed by further evaporation and spay
acid to the titanium chloride solution (Duyvesteyn et al. 2001c). After
hydrolysing, the titanium hydroxide is calcined to the desired form of
titanium dioxide, being either anatase or rutile. The titanium dioxide is
milled to provide the desired particle size distribution. The advantages
W. Zhang et al. / Hydrometallurgy 108 (2011) 177-188
controlled physical and chemical characteristics of the product, and
low costs, since dilution of the solution is avoided and the acid can be
(i) reacting a titanium compound with ammonia in an amount
exceeding the stoichiometric amount necessary to convert the
titanium compound to a titanium hydroxide or reacting a titanium
product, and (ii) calcining the obtained product

—

Sakatani et al. 2002:
Sakatani and Koike, 2003; 2004). The process easily produces titanium
oxide, which exhibits high photocatalytic activity under irradiation by
visible light, and having an average particle size of <20 nm.
Solvothermal techniques (especially the hydrothermal method)
2007). Unlike most other synthetic processes, the solvothermal
synthesis is performed under much milder chemical conditions
under relatively low temperatures. Compared to those methods
involving calcination and milling, which tend to result in agglomerate
formation and degradation of the surface, hydrothermal processing
non-aggregated nanomaterials may be obtained readily. The sol-
vothermal synthesis route is very similar to the hydrothermal route,
the only difference is the precursor solution is usually non-aqueous
and allows for the precise control over shape, size distribution,
crystallinity of titanium dioxide nanoparticles or nanostructure. Some
of these experimental parameters may include reaction temperature,
reaction time, solvent type, surfactant type and precursor type.
motif is very advantageous to maximise the TiO2 usage in applications.
Brooks, G., Cooksey, M., Wellwood, G., Goodes, C., 2007. Challenges in light metals
G6. Conclusions and recommendations
Abundant ilmenite is becoming the main source of titanium. Many
processes are commercially used or proposed to upgrade ilmenite to
produce synthetic rutile. Most of these processes involve a combina-
tion of the technologies of pyrometallurgy, hydrometallurgy and
electrometallurgy, and are generally expensive.
The commercialised thermo-chemical chloride processes such as
Kroll and Hunter processes need higher grade natural rutile or
upgraded synthetic rutile as the feed and chlorination step to produce
intermediate TiCl, for the production of pigment grade TiO, and
titanium metal. The thermo-chemical processes are very expensive
made, the thermo-chemical processes, such as the Kroll and Hunter
processes, hold little potential for significant cost reductions beyond
current technology. The development of the electro-chemical pro-
cesses for direct reduction of TiOz and electro-slag as feed material
and in-situ electrolysis has achieved some success. However, some
challenging issues such as redox cycling, feeding, kinetics, control heat
balance have to be resolved before scale-up to commercial
application.
Compared to the thermo-chemical and electro-chemical processes,
direct hydrometallurgical leach processes are advantageous in proces-
sing abundant ilmenite ores, low energy consumption and produce
sufficiently high quality of pigment grade TiO2 products for a wide range
of applications and major demand. The main drawbacks of the
conventional sulphate processes are the high consumption of H2SO,
and the production of large amounts of sulphate wastes and high cost for
been investigated intensively. Reclaiming HCl for recycling by hydro-
lysis or pyrohydrolysis processes is a significant strategy to reduce
extraction has been incorporated into processes to separate titanium
from iron and other impurities to enable the use of low grade ilmenite as
high purity TiO2. Novel caustic leaching process established features
high selectivity of titanium over iron in leaching step. Titanium dioxide
recommended.
Acknowledgement
The authors would like to thank Dr Matthew Jeffrey for reviewing
this paper and providing valuable comments. The support of the Parker
CRC for Integrated Hydrometallurgy Solutions (established and sup-
ported under the Australian Government's Cooperative Research
Centres Program) is gratefully acknowledged.
References
Anon, 1983. Titanium: past, present, and future. Report of the Panel on Assessment of
Titanium Availability: Current and Future Needs of the Committee on Technical
Aspects of Critical and Strategic Materials, National Materials Advisory Board
Commission on Engineering and technical Systems National Research Council.
National Academy Press, Washington, D.C. 1983.

Barksdale, J., 1966. Titanium: its Occurrence, Chemistry and Technology, Second
edition. The Ronald Press Company, New York.
Berkovich, S.A., 1975. Recovery of Titanium from Ores. US Patent, 3903239.
Bracanin, B.F., Clements, R.J., Davey, J.M., 1980. Direct reduction — the Western titanium
process for the production of synthetic rutile, ferutil and sponge iron AusIMM Pro.
275, 33-42 September.
production. Inst. Min Metall. C Miner. Process. Extractive Metallurgy Trans. 116 (1),
Cardarelli, F. 2003. A method for electrowinning of titanium metal or alloy from
titanium oxide containing compound in the liquid state. WO Patent No. 03/046258.
Cassidy, P.W., Clements, R,J., Ellis, B.A., Rolfe, P.R., 1986. The AMC Narngulu synthetic
rutile plant, a world source of ilmenite, rutile, monazite and zircon. Conference
Proceedings. AusIMM, Perth, W.A, pp. 123-128.

Chen, G.Z., Fray, D.]., Farthing, T.W., 2000. Direct electrochemical reduction of titanium
dioxide to titanium in molten calcium chloride. Nature 407, 361-363.

Chen, G.Z., Fray, D.J., Farthing, T.W., 2001. Cathodic deoxygenation of the alpha case on
titanium and alloys in molten calcium chloride. Metallogr. Mater Trans. B 32B,
1041-1052.
Deura, T.N., Wakino, M., Matsunaga, T., Suzuki, R.O., Ono, K., 1998. Titanium powder
production of TiCl4 gas injection into magnesium through molten salts. Metall.
Trans. B 29B, 1167-1174.

Doblin, C., Wellwood, G.A., 2007. TiRO™ — the development of a new process to produce
titanium. Chemeca 2007, 23-26, September 2007. Melbourne, Victoria, Australia.
Dooley Ill, G.J., 1975. Titanium production: ilmenite vs. rutile. JOM 8-16 March.

Duyvesteyn, W., Sabachy, B., Verhulst, D., Edmund, V., West-sells, P.G., 2001a. Processing
titaniferrous ore to titanium dioxide pigment, WO Patent 2001/00531 A1.

Duyvesteyn, W., Spitler, T., Sabachy, B., Vince, A., Prochazka, J., 2001b. Processing
aqueous solution to titanium dioxide pigment, WO Patent 2001/00530 Al.
Duyvesteyn, W., Spitler, T., Sabachy, B., Prochazka, J., 2001c. Processing aqueous

titanium chloride solution to ultrafine dioxide pigment, WO Patent 2001/12555 A2.
Duyvesteyn, W., Sabachy, B., Edmund, V., Verhulst, D., West-sells, P. G., Spitler, T. M.,
Vince, A., Burkholder, J. R., Paulus, B.J., and Huls, M., 2002. Processing titaniferrous
ore to titanium dioxide pigment, US Patent 2002/6375923 B1.

Duyvesteyn, W., Spitler, T., Sabachy, B., Vince, A., Prochazka, J., 2003. Processing
aqueous solution to titanium dioxide pigment, US Patent 2003/6548039 B1.
El-Hazek, N., Lasheen, T.A., El-Sheikh, R., Zaki, S.A., 2007. Hydrometallurgical criteria for
TiO2 leaching from Rosetta ilmenite by hydrochloric acid. Hydrometallurgy 87, 45-50.

Elliott, G.R.B., 1998. The continuous production of titanium powder using circulating
molten salt. JOM 48-49 September 1998.
Ellsworth, D.K., Verhulst, D., Spitler, T.M., Sabacky, B.J., 2000. Titanium nanoparticles
move to the marketplace. Chem. Innov. 30, 30-35.

Farrow, J.B., Ritchie, I.M., Mangono, P., 1987. The reaction between reduced ilmenite
and oxygen in ammonium chloride solution. Hydrometallurgy 18, 21-38.
Fray, D.J., 2001. Emerging molten salt technologies for metals production. JOM 26-31
Gambogi, J|., 2009b. Titanium mineral concentrates. US Geological Surv. 172-173.
Gambogi, J., 2010. Titanium and titanium dioxide, mineral commodity summaries. US
monazite and zircon. Conference Proceedings. AusIMM, Perth, W.A, pp. 143
Haves, F.H., Bomberger, H.B., Froes, F.H., Kaufman, L., Burte, H.M., 1984. Advances in
titanium extraction metallurgy. JOM 70-75 June 1984.
production, in Titanium: Science and Technology, 1, pp. 3-14.
Kahn, |.A., 1984. Non-rutile feed stocks for the production of titanium. JOM 33-38 July 1984.
Encyclopaedia of Chemical Technology, 23. John Wiley and Sons, pp. 98-130.
Canadian patent 2289967.
titanium metal from titanium-bearing ores involves leaching and selective removal!
of iron values by solvent extraction. US Patent 2001/007

646-Al.
Lakshmanan, V.

I., Sridhar, R., Ha
recovery of titanium in mixed chloride media. WO patent 2005/049872.
leaching. Hydrometallurgy 76, 123-129.
concentrated KOH solution under atmospheric pressure. International |. Minera!
In:

Tien, J.K., Elliott, |.F. (Eds.), Metallurgical Treatises. AIME, pp. 171-189.
formation in

the Kroll red

uction reactor.

Metall. Trans. B 35B, 65-74.
Ono, K., Suzuki,

R.O., 2002

. A new concept for producing Ti sponge: calciothermic
and titanium dioxide production. JOM 38-41.
Reaveley, Y.B.

-

1980. Synthetic rutile production at Associated Minerals Consolidated
ilmenite beneficiation process. In: Jones, M.]. (Ed.), Advances in Extractive
Production of Ti

tania. WO200403584
Rosebaum, J.B., 1982. Titanium technology trends. JOM 76-79 June 1982.
268-Al.
used as photocatalyst by reacting titanium compound with ammonia exceeding
Stoichiometric amount for converting titanium compound to titanium hydroxide,
Stuart, A.D., Lawson, J.A.,

Ward, C.B., and Peng, H., 20
Suzuki, R.O., 2007. Direct reduction processes for titanium oxide in molten salt. JOM
concept for electrowinning process of liquid titanium metal in molten Salt.
titanium dioxide from titaniferous slag using KOH sub-molten salt method. Chinese
van Vuuren, D.S., 2009. A critical evaluation of processes to produce primary titanium.
of molten titanium from titanium dioxide. JOM 53-55 October 2005.
process and its extension into the field of nanomaterials. CIM Bulletin ProQuest
Proceedings of Chloride Metallurgy 2002, 2. Montreal, Canada, pp. 401-415. October,
Watanable, M. and Sei, R
Wellwood, G. A. and Doblin, C., 2008. Lo

w temperature industrial process. US Patent
Slag in sodium hydroxide system. Hydrometallurgy 95, 22-27.
Zhang,

S., Nicol, M.]., 2009. An electrochemical! study of the red

uction and dissolution of
ilmenite in

sulfuric acid

solutions. Hydrometallurgy 97, 146-152.

